%%%
title			= "Address-specific DNS aliases (ANAME)"
abbrev			= "ANAME"
workgroup		= "DNS Operations"
area			= "Operations and Management"
submissiontype	= "IETF"
ipr				= "trust200902"
date			= 2018-10-14T09:00:06Z
keyword			= [
	"DNS",
	"RR",
	"ANAME",
	"CNAME",
	"apex",
]

[seriesInfo]
name			= "Internet-Draft"
value			= "draft-ietf-dnsop-aname-02"
status			= "standard"

[[author]]
initials		= "T."
surname			= "Finch"
fullname		= "Tony Finch"
organization	= "University of Cambridge"
 [author.address]
 email			= "dot@dotat.at"
  [author.address.postal]
  streets		= [
    "University Information Services",
	"Roger Needham Building",
	"7 JJ Thomson Avenue",
  ]
  city			= "Cambridge"
  country		= "England"
  code			= "CB3 0RB"

[[author]]
initials		= "E."
surname			= "Hunt"
fullname		= "Evan Hunt"
organization	= "ISC"
 [author.address]
 email			= "each@isc.org"
  [author.address.postal]
  street		= "950 Charter St"
  city			= "Redwood City"
  region		= "CA"
  code			= "94063"
  country		= "USA"

[[author]]
initials		= "P.D."
surname			= "van Dijk"
fullname		= "Peter van Dijk"
organization	= "PowerDNS.COM B.V."
abbrev			= "PowerDNS"
 [author.address]
 email			= "peter.van.dijk@powerdns.com"
  [author.address.postal]
  city			= "Den Haag"
  country		= "The Netherlands"

[[author]]
initials		= "A."
surname			= "Eden"
fullname		= "Anthony Eden"
organization	= "DNSimple"
 [author.address]
 email			= "anthony.eden@dnsimple.com"
 uri			= "https://dnsimple.com/"
  [author.address.postal]
  city			= "Boston"
  region		= "MA"
  code			= "USA"

%%%

.# Abstract

This document defines the "ANAME" DNS RR type, to provide similar
functionality to CNAME, but only for type A and AAAA queries. Unlike
CNAME, an ANAME can coexist with other record types. The ANAME RR
allows zone owners to make an apex domain name into an alias in a
standards compliant manner.


{mainmatter}


# Introduction

It may be desirable to provide web sites (and other services) at a
bare domain name (such as `example.com`) as well as a service-specific
subdomain (`www.example.com`).

If the web site is hosted by a third-party provider, the ideal way to
provision its name in the DNS is using a CNAME record, so that the
third party provider retains control over the mapping from names to IP
address(es). It is now common for name-to-address mappings to be
highly dynamic, dependent on client location, server load, etc.

However, CNAME records cannot coexist with other records. (The reason
why is explored in (#history)). This means they cannot appear at a
zone apex (such as `example.com`) because of the SOA, NS, and other
records that have to be present there. CNAME records can also conflict
at subdomains, for example if `department.example.edu` has separately
hosted mail and web servers.

Redirecting website lookups to an alternate domain name via SRV or URI
resource records would be an effective solution from the DNS point of
view, but to date this approach has not been accepted by browser
implementations.

As a result, the only widely supported and standards-compliant way to
publish a web site at a bare domain is to place A and/or AAAA records
at the zone apex. The flexibility afforded by CNAME is not available.

This document specifies a new RR type "ANAME", which provides similar
functionality to CNAME, but only for address queries (i.e., for type A
or AAAA). The basic idea is that the address records next to an ANAME
record are automatically copied from and kept in sync with the ANAME
target's address records. The ANAME record can be present at any DNS
node, and can coexist with most other RR types, enabling it to be
present at a zone apex, or any other name where the presence of other
records prevents the use of CNAME.

Similar authoritative functionality has been implemented and deployed
by a number of DNS software vendors and service providers, using names
such as ALIAS, ANAME, apex CNAME, CNAME flattening, and top level
redirection. These mechanisms are proprietary, which hinders the
ability of zone owners to have the same data served from multiple
providers, or to move from one provider to another. None of these
proprietary implementations includes a mechanism for resolvers to
follow the redirection chain themselves.


## Overview

The core functionality of this mechanism allows zone
administrators to start using ANAME records unilaterally, without
requiring secondary servers or resolvers to be upgraded.

  * The resource record definition in (#rdata) is intended to provide
    zone data portability between standards-compliant DNS servers and
    the common core functionality of existing proprietary
    ANAME-like facilities.

  * The zone maintenance mechanism described in (#primary) behaves as if DNS
    UPDATE [@!RFC2136] were being used to keep an ANAME's sibling address
    records in sync with the ANAME target; this allows it to interoperate
    with existing DNSSEC signers, secondary servers, and resolvers.

This is enough to be useful by itself. However, it can be less than
optimal in certain situations: for instance, when the ANAME target uses
clever tricks to provide different answers to different clients to
improve latency or load balancing.

  * The Additional section processing rules in (#additional) inform
    resolvers that an ANAME record is in play.

  * Resolvers can use this ANAME information as described in
    (#resolver) to obtain answers that are tailored to the resolver
    rather than to the zone's primary master.

Resolver support for ANAME is not necessary, since ANAME-oblivious
resolvers will get working answers from authoritative servers. It's
just an optimization that can be rolled out incrementally, and that
will help ANAME to work better the more widely it is deployed.


## Terminology

An "address record" is a DNS resource record whose type is A or AAAA.
These are referred to as "address types". "Address query" refers to a
DNS query for any address type.

The "sibling address records" of an ANAME record are the address
records at the same owner name as the ANAME, which are subject to
ANAME substitution.

The "target address records" of an ANAME record are the address
records obtained by resolving the ultimate target of the ANAME (see
(#subst)).

Other DNS-related terminology can be found in
[@!I-D.ietf-dnsop-terminology-bis].

The key words **MUST**, **MUST NOT**, **REQUIRED**, **SHALL**,
**SHALL NOT**, **SHOULD**, **SHOULD NOT**, **RECOMMENDED**, **MAY**,
and **OPTIONAL** in this document are to be interpreted as described in
[@!RFC2119].


# The ANAME resource record {#rdata}

This document defines the "ANAME" DNS resource record type, with RR TYPE
value [TBD].

## Presentation and wire format

The ANAME presentation format is identical to that of CNAME [@!RFC1033]:

```
    owner ttl class ANAME target
```

The wire format is also identical to CNAME [@!RFC1035], except that
name compression is not permitted in ANAME RDATA, per [@!RFC3597].


## Coexistence with other types {#coexistence}

Only one ANAME \<target\> can be defined per \<owner\>. An ANAME
RRset MUST NOT contain more than one resource record.

An ANAME's sibling address records are under the control of ANAME
processing (see (#primary)) and are not first-class records in their
own right. They MAY exist in zone files, but they may be altered
by ANAME processing.

ANAME records MAY freely coexist at the same owner name with other RR
types, except they MUST NOT coexist with CNAME or any other RR type
that restricts the types with which it can itself coexist.

Like other types, ANAME records can coexist with DNAME records at the
same owner name; in fact, the two can be used cooperatively to
redirect both the owner name address records (via ANAME) and everything
under it (via DNAME).


# Additional section processing {#additional}

The requirements in this section apply to both recursive and
authoritative servers.

An ANAME target MAY resolve to address records via a chain of CNAME
and/or ANAME records; any CNAME/ANAME chain MUST be included when
adding target address records to a response's Additional section.


## Address queries

When a server receives an address query for a name that has an ANAME
record, the response's Additional section:

  * MUST contain the ANAME record;

  * MAY contain the target address records that match the query
    type (or the corresponding proof of nonexistence), if they are
    available and the target address RDATA fields differ from the
    sibling address RRset.

The ANAME record indicates to a client that it might wish to resolve
the target address records itself. The target address records might
not be available if the server is authoritative and does not include
out-of-zone or non-authoritative data in its answers, or if the server
is recursive and the records are not in the cache.

[MM: Discuss what should be in the additional section: ANAME makes sense,
but differs from CNAME logic (where the CNAME is in the answer section).
Additional target records that match the query type in my opinion should
go in the answer section. Additional target address records that do not match
the query type can go in the additional section].


## ANAME queries

When a server receives an query for type ANAME, there are three
possibilities:

  * The query resolved to an ANAME record, and the server has the
    target address records; any target address records SHOULD be added
    to the Additional section.

  * The query resolved to an ANAME record, and the server does not
    have the target address records; any sibling address records
    SHOULD be added to the Additional section.

  * The query did not resolve to an ANAME record; any address records
    with the same owner name SHOULD be added to the Additional section
    of the NOERROR response.

When adding address records to the Additional section, if not all
address types are present and the zone is signed, the server SHOULD
include a DNSSEC proof of nonexistence for the missing address types.


# Substituting ANAME sibling address records {#subst}

This process is used by both primary masters (see (#primary)) and
resolvers (see (#resolver)), though they vary in how they apply the
edit described in the final step.

The following steps MUST be performed for each address type:

  1. Starting at the ANAME owner, follow the chain of ANAME and/or
     CNAME records as far as possible to find the ultimate target.

  1. If a loop is detected, continue with an empty RRset, otherwise get
     the ultimate target's address records. (Ignore any sibling address
     records of intermediate ANAMEs.)

  1. Stop if resolution failed. (Note that NXDOMAIN and NODATA count as
     successfully resolving an empty RRset.)

  1. Replace the owner of the target address records with the owner of
     the ANAME record. Reduce the TTL to match the ANAME record if it
     is greater. Drop any RRSIG records.

  1. Stop if this modified RRset is the same as the sibling RRset
     (ignoring any RRSIG records). The comparison MAY treat
     nearly-equal TTLs as the same.

  1. If the resolution returned a positive response (NOERROR and ANCOUNT > 0),
     delete the sibling address RRset and replace it with the modified
     RRset. If resolution resulted in NXDOMAIN or NODATA keep the sibling
     RRset in the response.

At this point, the substituted RRset is not signed. A primary master
will proceed to sign the substituted RRset, whereas resolvers can only
use the substituted RRset when an unsigned answer is appropriate. This
is explained in more detail in the following sections.


# ANAME processing by primary masters {#primary}

Each ANAME's sibling address records are kept up-to-date as if by the
following process, for each address type:

  * Perform ANAME sibling address record substitution as described in
    (#subst). Any edit performed in the final step is applied to the
    ANAME's zone in the same manner as a DNS UPDATE [@!RFC2136].

  * If resolution failed, wait for a period before trying again. This
    retry time SHOULD be configurable.

  * Otherwise, wait until the target address record TTL has expired,
    then repeat.

The following informative subsections explore the effects of this
specification, to clarify how it can work in practice.


## Implications

A zone containing ANAME records has to be a dynamic zone, similar to
automatic DNSSEC signature maintenance.

DNSSEC signatures on sibling address records are generated in the same
way as for normal DNS UPDATEs.

Sibling address records are committed to the zone and stored in
nonvolatile storage. This allows a server to restart without delays
due to ANAME processing.

Sibling address records are served from authoritative servers with a
fixed TTL. Normally this TTL is expected to be the same as the target
address records' TTL (or the ANAME TTL if that is smaller); however
the exact mechanism for obtaining the target is unspecified, so cache
effects or deliberate policies might make the sibling TTL smaller.
There is a longer discussion of TTL handling in {#ttls}.

Secondary servers rely on zone transfers to obtain sibling address
records, just like the rest of the zone, and serve them in the usual
way (with (#additional) Additional section processing if they support
it). A working DNS NOTIFY [@?RFC1996] setup is necessary to avoid
extra delays propagating updated sibling address records when they
change.


## Alternatives

The process at the start of this section is specified using the mighty
weasel words "as if", which are intended to allow a great deal of
latitude to implementers so long as the observed behaviour is
compatible.

For instance, it is likely to be more efficient to manage the polling
per ANAME target rather than per ANAME as specified.

More radically, some existing ANAME-like implementations are based on
a different DNS server architecture, in which a zone's published
authoritative servers all perform the duties of a primary master in a
distributed manner: provisioning records from a non-DNS back-end
store, refreshing DNSSEC signatures, and so forth. This architecture
does not use standard zone transfers, so there is no need for its
ANAME implementation to poll the target address records to ensure that
its secondary servers are up to date (because there are no secondary
servers as such). Instead the authoritative servers can do ANAME
sibling address substitution on demand.

The exact mechanism for obtaining the target address records is
unspecified; typically they will be resolved in the DNS in the usual
way, but if an ANAME implementation has special knowledge of the
target it can short-cut the substitution process, or use clever tricks
such as client-dependant answers.


# ANAME processing by resolvers {#resolver}

When a resolver makes an address query in the usual way, it might
receive a response containing ANAME information in the additional
section, as described in (#additional). This informs the resolver that
it MAY resolve the ANAME target address records to get answers that
are tailored to the resolver rather than the ANAME's primary master.
It SHOULD include the target address records in the Additional section
of its responses as described in (#additional).

In order to provide tailored answers to clients that are
ANAME-oblivious, the resolver MAY do its own sibling address record
substitution in the following situations:

  * The resolver's client queries with DO=0. (As discussed in
    (#security-considerations), if the resolver finds it would
    downgrade a secure answer to insecure, it MAY choose not to
    substitute the sibling address records.)

  * The resolver's client queries with DO=1 and the ANAME and sibling
    address records are unsigned. (Note that this situation does not apply
    when the records are signed but insecure: the resolver might not be
    able to validate them because of a broken chain of trust, but its
    client could have an extra trust anchor that does allow it to validate
    them; if the resolver substitutes the sibling address records they will
    become bogus.)

In these first two cases, the resolver MAY perform ANAME sibling
address record substitution as described in (#subst). Any edit
performed in the final step is applied to response's Answer section.
The resolver SHOULD then perform Additional section processing as
described in (#additional).

If the resolver's client is querying using an API such as
`getaddrinfo` [@?RFC3493] that does not support DNSSEC validation, the
resolver MAY perform ANAME sibling address record substitution as
described in (#subst). Any edits performed in the final step are
applied to the addresses returned by the API. (This case is for
validating stub resolvers that query an upstream recursive server with
DO=1, so they cannot rely on the recursive server to do ANAME
substitution for them.)


# IANA considerations

IANA is requested to assign a DNS RR TYPE value for ANAME resource
records under the "Resource Record (RR) TYPEs" subregistry under the
"Domain Name System (DNS) Parameters" registry.

IANA may wish to consider the creation of a registry of address types;
addition of new types to such a registry would then implicitly update
this specification.


# Security considerations

When a primary master updates an ANAME's sibling address records to
match its target address records, it is uses its own best information
as to the correct answer. The updated records may be signed by the
primary master, but that is not a guarantee of the actual correctness
of the answer. This can have the effect of promoting an insecure
response from the ANAME \<target\> to a signed response from the
\<owner\>, which may then appear to clients to be more trustworthy
than it should. To mitigate harm from this, DNSSEC validation SHOULD
be used when resolving the ANAME \<target\>. Primary masters MAY
refuse to substitute ANAME sibling address records unless the
\<target\> node is both signed and validated.

When a resolver substitutes an ANAME's sibling address records, it can
find that the sibling address records are secure but the target
address records are insecure. Going ahead with the substitution will
downgrade a secure answer to an insecure one. But this is likely to be
the counterpart of the situation described in the previous paragraph,
so the resolver is downgrading an answer that the ANAME's primary
master upgraded. A resolver will only downgrade an answer in this way
when its client is security-oblivious; however the client's path to
the resolver is likely to be practically safer than the resolver's
path to the ANAME target's servers. Resolvers MAY choose not to
substitute sibling address records when they are more secure than the
target address records.


{backmatter}


# Acknowledgments

Thanks to Mark Andrews, Ray Bellis, Stefan Buehler, Paul Ebersman,
Richard Gibson, Tatuya JINMEI, Hakan Lindqvist, Mattijs Mekking,
Stephen Morris, Bjorn Mott, Richard Salts, Mukund Sivaraman, Job
Snijders, Jan Vcelak, Paul Vixie, Duane Wessels, and Paul Wouters for
discussion and feedback.


# Implementation status

PowerDNS currently implements a similar authoritative-only feature
using "ALIAS" records, which are expanded by the primary server and
transfered as address records to secondaries.

[TODO: Add discussion of DNSimple, DNS Made Easy, EasyDNS, Cloudflare, Amazon,
Dyn, and Akamai.]


# Historical note {#history}

In the early DNS [@?RFC0882], CNAME records were allowed to coexist
with other records. However this led to coherency problems: if a
resolver had no cache entries for a given name, it would resolve
queries for un-cached records at that name in the usual way; once it
had cached a CNAME record for a name, it would resolve queries for
un-cached records using CNAME target instead.

For example, given the zone contents below, the original CNAME
behaviour meant that if you asked for `alias.example.com TXT` first,
you would get the answer "owner", but if you asked for
`alias.example.com A` then `alias.example.com TXT` you would get the
answer "target".

```
   alias.example.com.      TXT    "owner"
   alias.example.com.      CNAME  canonical.example.com.
   canonical.example.com.  TXT    "target"
   canonical.example.com.  A      192.0.2.1
```

This coherency problem was fixed in [@?RFC0973] which introduced the
inconvenient rule that a CNAME acts as an alias for all other RR types
at a name, which prevents the coexistence of CNAME with other records.

A better fix might have been to improve the cache's awareness of which
records do and do not coexist with a CNAME record. However that would
have required a negative cache mechanism which was not added to the
DNS until later [@?RFC1034] [@?RFC2308].

While [@?RFC2065] relaxed the restriction by allowing coexistence of
CNAME with DNSSEC records, this exception is still not applicable to
other resource records. RRSIG and NSEC exist to prove the integrity of
the CNAME record; they are not intended to associate arbitrary data
with the domain name. DNSSEC records avoid interoperability problems
by being largely invisible to security-oblivious resolvers.

Now that the DNS has negative caching, it is tempting to amend the
algorithm for resolving with CNAME records to allow them to coexist
with other types. Although an amended resolver will be compatible with
the rest of the DNS, it will not be of much practical use because
authoritative servers which rely on coexisting CNAMEs will not
interoperate well with older resolvers. Practical experiments show
that the problems are particularly acute when CNAME and MX try to
coexist.


# On preserving TTLs {#ttls}

An ANAME's sibling address records are in an unusual situation: they
are authoritative data in the owner's zone, so from that point of view
the owner has the last say over what their TTL should be; on the other
hand, ANAMEs are supposed to act as aliases, in which case the target
should control the address record TTLs.

However there are some technical constraints that make it difficult to
preserve the target address record TTLs.

The conclusion of the following subsections is that the end-to-end TTL
(from the authoritative servers for the target address records to
end-user DNS caches) will be the target address record TTL plus the
sibling address record TTL.

[MM: Discuss: I think it should be just the ANAME record TTL perhaps
the minimum of ANAME and sibling address RRset TTL. We should provide
some guidance on TTL settings for ANAME).

## Query bunching

If the times of end-user queries for a domain name are well
distributed, then (normally) queries received by the authoritative
servers for that domain are also well distributed. If the domain is
popular, a recursive server will re-query for it once every TTL
seconds, but the periodic queries from all the various recursive
servers will not be aligned, so the queries remain well distributed.

However, imagine that the TTLs of an ANAME's sibling address records
are decremented in the same way as cache entries in recursive servers.
Then all the recursive servers querying for the name will try to
refresh their caches at the same time, when the TTL reaches zero. They
will become synchronized and all the queries for the domain will be
bunched into periodic spikes.

This specification says that ANAME sibling address records have a
normal fixed TTL derived from (e.g. equal or nearly equal to) the
target address records' original TTL. There is no cache-like
decrementing TTL, so there is no bunching of queries.


## Upstream caches

There are two straightforward ways to get an RRset's original TTL:

  * by directly querying an authoritative server;

  * using the original TTL field from the RRset's RRGIG record(s).

However, not all zones are signed, and a primary master might not be
able to directly query other authoritative servers (e.g. if it is a
hidden primary behind a strict firewall). Instead it might have to
obtain an ANAME's target address records via some other recursive
server.

Querying via a separate recursive server means the primary master
cannot trivially obtain the target address records' original TTLs.
Fortunately this is likely to be a self-correcting problem for similar
reasons to the query-bunching discussed in the previous subsection.
The primary master re-checks the target address records just after the
TTL expires, when its upstream cache has just refreshed them, so the
TTL will be nearly equal to the original TTL.

A related consideration is that the primary master cannot in general
refresh its copies of an ANAME's target address records more
frequently than their TTL, without privileged control over its
resolver cache.

Combined with the requirement that sibling address records are served
with a fixed TTL, this means that the end-to-end TTL will be the
target address record TTL (which determines when the sibling address
records are updated) plus the sibling address record TTL (which
determines when end-user caches are updated).


## ANAME chains

ANAME sibling address record substitution is made slightly more
complicated by the requirement to follow chains of ANAME and/or CNAME
records. This stops the end-to-end TTL from being inflated by each
ANAME in the chain.


## TTLs and zone transfers

When things are working properly (with secondary name servers
responding to NOTIFY messages promptly) the authoritative servers will
follow changes to ANAME target address records according to their
TTLs. As a result the end-to-end TTL is unchanged from the previous
subsection.

If NOTIFY doesn't work, the TTLs can be stretched by the zone's SOA
refresh timer. More serious breakage can stretch them up to the zone
expiry time.

A highly dynamic ANAME processing zone should expect an increase in
the number of zone transfers.


# Changes since the last revision

  * Major revamp, so authoritative servers (other than primary
    masters) now do not do any special ANAME processing, just
    Additional section processing.
