# Introduction
  
Websites hosted by content distribution networks are often served by
multiple IP addresses handling different geographic areas. In many cases,
an initial query for a domain name returns a CNAME record whose \<target\>
is a name served by the CDN, and which ultimately resolves to a different
final answer depending on the client's IP address or subnet, geographic
location, or other considerations.

It is common practice for websites to publish content at their registered
domain name (sometimes referred to as a "bare domain" or "zone apex": for
example, "example.com" rather than "www.example.com"). However,
[](#RFC1033) forbids the use of CNAME records at the same node as any
other record type. Zone apex nodes always contain SOA and NS RRsets,
and frequently contain other types such as DNSKEY, MX, TXT/SPF, etc.
Consequently, a CNAME record is not permitted at zone apex nodes.

It should be noted that [](#RFC4034) relaxed this restriction by allowing
coexistence of CNAME with RRSIG and NSEC records, but such exceptions are
not applicable to other resource records. RRSIG and NSEC exist to prove the
integrity of the CNAME record; they are not intended to associate arbitrary
data with the domain name.

DNAME [](#RFC6672) is also not a solution, as its function is to redirect
all names in the namespace below the DNAME \<owner\>, not the DNAME
\<owner\> itself.

Redirecting website lookups to an alternate domain name via SRV or URI
resource records would be an effective solution, but to date this approach
has not been accepted by browser implementations. In addition, it is
not possible to use SRV records with wildcard names.

As a result of the above, the only widely supported and standards-compliant
way to publish content at a zone apex is to to place A and/or AAAA records
at that node.  The flexibility afforded by CNAME is not available.

This document specifies a new RR type "ANAME", which provides similar
functionality to CNAME, but only for address queries (i.e., for type A or
AAAA).  The ANAME record can be present at any DNS node, and can coexist
with most other RR types, enabling it to be present at a zone apex,
or any other place where the presence of other records prevents the use
of CNAME.

Authoritative servers configured with ANAME records will answer address
queries for the ANAME owner with addresses found at the ANAME's target, and
also with the ANAME itself. Recursive resolvers which understand ANAME can
re-query for the ANAME target, just as if they had received a CNAME
response. Recursive resolvers which do not understand ANAME will ignore
the ANAME and consume the provided A/AAAA records directly.

Similar authoritative functionality has been implemented and deployed by
a number of DNS software vendors and service providers, using names such
as ALIAS, ANAME, apex CNAME, CNAME flattening, and top level redirection.
These approaches have all been standards-noncompliant in one way or
another, and none have provided a mechanism for a recursive resolver
to follow the redirection chain itself.

## Terminology

"Address type" refers to a DNS RR type that encodes a network address.
Currently the set of address types consists of A and AAAA. (This is not
meant to be an exclusive list: in the event that any new address types
are standardized in the future, this specification will cover them as
well.)

"Address query" refers to a DNS query for any address type.

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
document are to be interpreted as described in [](#RFC2119).
    
# The ANAME Resource Record

This document defines the "ANAME" DNS resource record type, with RR TYPE
value [TBD].

The ANAME presentation format is identical to that of CNAME [](#RFC1033):
```
    owner ttl class ANAME target
```
The wire format is also identical to CNAME, except that name compression
is not permitted in ANAME RDATA, per [](#RFC3597).

Only one ANAME \<target\> can be defined per \<owner\>. An ANAME
RRset MUST NOT contain more than one resource record.

# Authoritative Server Behavior

When an ANAME record is present at a DNS node and a query is received by an
authoritative server for type A or AAAA, the authoritative server MUST return
the ANAME RR in the answer section.

Because not all querying resolvers will understand ANAME, the authoritative
server MUST also return address records, as described below, if it is able
to retrieve them.  This is conceptually similar to the synthesized CNAME
record included with DNAME responses [](#RFC6672).

Authoritative servers implementing ANAME MUST be equipped to resolve the
ANAME \<target\> on the querying resolver's behalf, either by sending
queries to an external caching resolver or by implementing recursive
resolution logic and a DNS cache internally, so that address records can
be expanded when the ANAME \<target\> is in a separate zone from \<owner\>.

If a query for the ANAME \<target\> returns a chaining response (i.e.,
CNAME, DNAME, or another ANAME), then the authoritative server (or the
resolver tasked with resolving the ANAME \<target\> on its behalf)
MUST attempt to follow the chain until it is able to resolve a final
address response, or until resolution fails.  However, the intermediate
ANAMEs, CNAMEs, and DNAMEs encountered during this resolution process
MUST NOT be included in the final response returned to the client.

## Address records returned with ANAME

If the original query is for type A, and an RRset of type A exists at the
final ANAME \<target\>, then that A RRset (with \<owner\> changed to match
that of the ANAME RR), MUST be appended to the answer section after the ANAME
RRset.  If an AAAA RRset is also known to exist at the ANAME \<target\>, then
the AAAA RRset MAY be appended to the additional section (again, with
\<owner\> changed to match that of the ANAME RR).

Similarly, if the original query was for type AAAA, and an AAAA RRset
exists at the final ANAME \<target\>, then it is appended to the answer
section (with \<owner\> changed).  If an A RRset also exists at the
final ANAME \<target\> then it MAY be appended to the additional section.

If the address type originally queried is not present at the ANAME
\<target\>, then the answer section of the response MUST include only
the ANAME.  The response MUST also include the SOA, as it would in a
NODATA response, along with NSEC or NSEC3 if applicable.  If another
address type is present at the ANAME \<target\>, then it MAY be included
in the additional section.

If the original query is for type ANAME, both A and AAAA records MAY be
returned in the additional section.

If the original query is for type ANY, and if access to ANY query
processing is not restricted, then the answer section MUST contain both the
ANAME and the A and AAAA RRsets, if successfully resolved at the ANAME
\<target\>.

How and when an authoritative server resolves the address responses from
the ANAME \<target\> (when it is not itself authoritative for \<target\>)
is unspecified. If the authoritative server is capable of performing
recursive resolution, then it MAY resolve the query itself, or it MAY send
address queries to an external resolver.  It MAY send address queries to
the ANAME \<target\> when initially loading the zone, cache the responses
locally, and refresh them periodically according to their TTLs, or it MAY
delay resolution of address records until a query is received for the ANAME
\<owner\>. In either case, for performance reasons, it is RECOMMENDED that
address records be cached locally by the authoritative server.

Address records that are cached locally MUST have a limited TTL.  The
initial TTL for locally-cached address records MUST not exceed the minimum
of the ANAME TTL, the TTLs of the address records retrieved during ANAME
<\target\> resolution, and the TTLs of any intermediate ANAME, CNAME, or
DNAME records.  The TTL of the cached address records MUST count down, just
as it would in a conventional resolver cache.  Address records with expired
TTLs MUST NOT be used to answer address queries until refreshed by sending
a new query to the ANAME \<target\>, unless the server is configured to
allow the use of stale data as described in [](#I-D.ietf-dnsop-serve-stale).

If the original query is for a specific address type, resolution of address
records at the ANAME \<target\> fails for any reason other than NXDOMAIN or
NODATA, and cached data cannot be used, then the response MUST include the
ANAME record and set the RCODE to SERVFAIL.

If configured to do so, then the authoritative server MAY, when sending
queries to the ANAME \<target\>, include an EDNS CLIENT-SUBNET (ECS)
option [](#RFC7871), either forwarding an ECS option that was sent
to it by the querying resolver, or by generating a new ECS option from
the querying resolver's address.  If a response from the ANAME \<target\>
includes an ECS option with a SCOPE PREFIX-LENGTH greater than zero, the
response SHOULD be cached in such a way that it would subsequently only be
used in response to queries from the same client subnet.

## Coexistence with other types

If the zone is configured with an A or AAAA RRset at the same DNS node as
ANAME, then the ANAME is considered to have already been expanded.  If
during query processing any address records are found at the same node as
an ANAME RR, then the ANAME RR MUST NOT be further expanded by the
authoritative server.

ANAME MUST NOT coexist with CNAME or any other RR type that restricts
the types with which it can itself coexist.

Like other types, ANAME MUST NOT exist below a DNAME, but it can coexist
at the same node; in fact, the two can be used cooperatively to redirect
both the owner name (via ANAME) and everything under it (via DNAME).

ANAME can freely coexist at the same owner name with any other RR type.

## Zone transfer

By default, there is no special consideration for doing zone transfers that
contain ANAME: The ANAME, A, and AAAA records that are in the zone will
be transferred just like any other zone records.

However, if in a deployment the ANAME resolution is performed at the master,
but not at the secondaries, the master should have a mechanism to transfer the
expanded ANAME.

### ANAME expansion

A server that performas ANAME resolution MAY expand the ANAME in a zone
transfer.  When ANAME expansion is done, all A and AAAA records on the same
\<owner\> name MUST be replaced with the ANAME-resolved A and AAAA records.

This has the disadvantage that the zone contents at the secondaries differ
than the zone contents at the master.  But it is the desired behavior for
serving ANAME-based responses because the master and its secondaries will
respond with the same answer for received address queries.

Another thing to consider when doing ANAME expansion is the limited TTL of the
expanded RRset. An expanded record MUST NOT be used if its TTL exceeds.  In
setups where the limited TTL is short this may result in more zone transfers,
as if the zone contents would change rapidly.  So even if the ANAME record
has a long TTL, the target may have a short TTL and the expanded records have
to be transferred frequently.

With these disadvantages in mind, it is NOT RECOMMENDED to have a deployment
of ANAME in zones that are transferred to servers that do not do ANAME
resolution.  In other words ANAME expansion in zone transfer is NOT
RECOMMENDED.

## DNSSEC signing

If the zone in which the ANAME resides is DNSSEC-signed, and if the server
has access to its private zone-signing key, then the A and AAAA RRsets MUST
be signed, either in advance when populating the A/AAAA answers for the
ANAME records, or "on the fly" when responding to a query or a zone transfer.

In the case that resolved A/AAAA RRsets are signed, the server MUST respect
the TTLs of the address records, MUST refresh the address records by
re-resolving the ANAME \<target\> when their TTLs expire, SHOULD respond to
address queries with TTLs that count down as they would when answering from a
normal DNS cache, and MUST inform secondary servers via DNS NOTIFY they need
to refresh the zone when address records have been updated.

A secondary server SHOULD store address records and associated RRSIGs supplied
via zone transfer in such a way that their TTLs will count down, as they would
in a normal DNS cache, and ultimately trigger a zone refresh query upon
reaching zero. When a secondary server is responding to an address query, it
SHOULD answer with the reduced TTL, but when responding to a zone transfer
request, it MUST answer with the original TTL received from the primary.

If this address record expansion and signing during zone transfer is not
supported, then every authoritative server providing ANAME responses
in a signed zone SHOULD have access to the private zone-signing key for
that zone.  Deployment of ANAME in signed zones where address records
cannot be signed due to lack of access to the private zone-signing key is
NOT RECOMMENDED.

When ANAME is present in a signed DNS node and address records exist at the
ANAME \<target\>, the type bit map in the NSEC [](#RFC4034) or NSEC3
[](#RFC5155) record for that node MUST include bits for A and/or AAAA as
well as ANAME. This is for the benefit of validating resolvers not
implementing ANAME which may use a signed proof of nonexistence for type A
and AAAA to prevent address queries from being resolved. The type bit map
SHOULD only include address types which are known to exist at the \<target\>.

Because validating resolvers which do not yet implement ANAME will not be
aware that this is an alias response, they will attempt to validate the A
and AAAA responses included with an ANAME response as if they had
originated from the ANAME \<owner\>.  Passing along the RRSIGs associated
with the original A and AAAA RRsets from the ANAME \<target\> will not be
sufficient for DNSSEC validation.  Consequently, if the server does not
have access to the private zone-signing key, then it SHOULD NOT return
unsigned address records unless every resolver with access to the zone is
known to support ANAME. (For instance, this might be the case in a
split-horizon deployment where ANAME records are only served to an internal
network with its own resolvers.)

# Recursive Server Behavior

When a recursive resolver sends a query of type A or AAAA and receives a
response with an ANAME RRset in the answer section, it MUST re-query for
the ANAME \<target\>.  This is necessary because, in some cases, the
address received will be dependent on network topology and other
considerations, and the resolver may find a different answer than the
authoritative server did. (This requirement MAY be relaxed if both
the ANAME \<owner\> and \<target\> are validly signed and provably in
the same zone.)

If resolution fails -- for example, due to the local resolver being
nonfunctional or the ANAME \<target\> zone being unreachable -- then the
resolver MAY use the address records that were included in the
authoritative response as a fallback. Otherwise, these records MUST
NOT be cached or returned.

If configured to do so, the resolver MAY include an EDNS CLIENT-SUBNET
option [](#RFC7871) both when sending the initial query to the ANAME
\<owner\> and when re-querying for the ANAME \<target\>. If the response
includes a SCOPE PREFIX-LENGTH greater than zero, the response SHOULD be
cached in such a way that it would subsequently only be used in response
to queries from the same client subnet.

# Examples

Given the following zone:

```
$ORIGIN example.com.
@   IN SOA   example.com hostmaster.example.com 1 7200 600 1209600 60
@   IN NS    ns1
@   IN ANAME example.com.my-cdn.example.net.
www IN CNAME example.com.my-cdn.example.net.
```

A query for example.com/A would return the following:

```
;; QUESTION SECTION:
;example.com.                   IN      A

;; ANSWER SECTION:
example.com.            5       IN      ANAME   example.com.my-cdn.example.net.
example.com.            5       IN      A       192.0.2.1

;; ADDITIONAL SECTION:
example.com.            5       IN      AAAA    2001:db8::1
```

Similarly, for example.com/AAAA:

```
;; QUESTION SECTION:
;example.com.                   IN      AAAA

;; ANSWER SECTION:
example.com.            5       IN      ANAME   example.com.my-cdn.example.net.
example.com.            5       IN      AAAA    2001:db8::1

;; ADDITIONAL SECTION:
example.com.            5       IN      A       192.0.2.1
```


A query for example.com/ANAME would receive only the ANAME in the
answer section, with the addresses for example.com.my-cdn.example.net
expanded in the additional section:

```
;; QUESTION SECTION:
;example.com.                   IN      ANAME

;; ANSWER SECTION:
example.com.            5       IN      ANAME   example.com.my-cdn.example.net.

;; ADDITIONAL SECTION:
example.com.my-cdn.example.net. 5 IN    A       192.0.2.1
example.com.my-cdn.example.net. 5 IN    AAAA    2001:db8::1
```

Meanwhile, a query for a non-address type would be returned normally:

```
;; QUESTION SECTION:
;example.com.                   IN      NS

;; ANSWER SECTION:
example.com.            5       IN      NS      ns1.example.com.
```

# Operational Considerations

When a zone containing ANAME records is transferred to a secondary server,
the ANAME records are transferred, but the A or AAAA records retrieved from
the ANAME \<target\> may not be. If the primary server implements ANAME but
the secondary server does not, then the two will return different answers
for address queries. It is therefore RECOMMENDED that ANAME not be deployed
in a zone unless all of the authoritative servers for that zone implement
ANAME, or the primary is able to expand the ANAME with the related address
RRsets during the zone transfer.

# Implementation Status

PowerDNS [](https://powerdns.com) currently implements a similar
authoritative-only feature using "ALIAS" records, which are expanded by the
primary server and transfered as address records to secondaries.

[TODO: Add discussion of DNSimple, DNS Made Easy, EasyDNS, Cloudflare, Amazon,
and Akamai.]

# Security Considerations

An authoritative server which implements ANAME resolves address
queries on behalf of its clients, either internally or by querying an
external resolver. This resolution must be allowed to take place
regardless of whether the client would ordinarily have been permitted
by local policy to send recursive queries.

When a resolver that does not understand ANAME receives a response
containing A or AAAA records with \<owner\> rewritten to match that of the
ANAME RR, this may bypass security mechanisms based on local policy
limiting access to the original ANAME \<target\>. One possible mitigation
for this is to make sure the resolver being used during ANAME resolution
lives outside of such critical network sections.
 
If ANAME is used in a signed zone, validating resolvers that do not
understand ANAME will not be able to validate the A and AAAA records
included in the response, unless the responding server has added signatures
for those records.  Merely passing along signatures from the \<target\> is
not sufficient.  An authoritative server hosting a secure domain that
includes ANAME SHOULD therefore have access to the private zone-signing key
for that domain; otherwise, the operator must accept that validation
failures will be common until ANAME is widly deployed.

Both authoritative servers and resolvers that implement ANAME SHOULD
carefully check for loops and treat them as an error condition. One
possible approach is to implement a hop counter and stop resolution
when a maximum hop count is reached.

An authoritative resolver returning address records which were obtained by
resolving the ANAME \<target\> is supplying its own best information to
clients as to the correct answer. The response may be signed by the
authoritative server, but that is not a guarantee of the actual correctness
of the answer. This can have the effect of promoting an insecure response
from the ANAME \<target\> to a signed response from the \<owner\>, which
may then appear to clients to be more trustworthy than it should. To
mitigate harm from this, DNSSEC validation SHOULD be used when resolving
the ANAME \<target\>.  Authoritative servers MAY refuse to expand ANAME
records unless the \<target\> node is both signed and validated.

# IANA Considerations

IANA is requested to assign a DNS RR data type value for the ANAME RR type
under the "Resource Record (RR) TYPEs" subregistry under the "Domain Name
System (DNS) Parameters" registry.

IANA may wish to consider the creation of a registry of address types;
addition of new types to such a registry would then implicitly update
this specification.

# Acknowledgments

Thanks to Mukund Sivaraman, Stephen Morris, Ray Bellis, Mark Andrews,
Richard Salts, Job Snijders, Richard Gibson, Hakan Lindqvist, Jan Vcelak,
Tatuya JINMEI, Duane Wessels, Stefan Buehler, Bjorn Mott, and Tony Finch
for discussion and feedback.
